See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/330683906
Indian Agriculture and Farmers-Problems and Reforms
Chapter · January 2016
CITATIONS21READS120,829
4 authors, including:
S. K. GOYAL
Banaras Hindu University
74 PUBLICATIONS   865 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Dr Jai P. Rai
Banaras Hindu University
68 PUBLICATIONS   1,842 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Shree Ram Singh
NTPC Limited
11 PUBLICATIONS   44 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Dr Jai P. Rai on 28 January 2019.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
----------------Page (0) Break----------------
Goyal,	S.K.,	Rai,	Jai	P.		and	Kumar,	Sushil	(2016).	Indian	Agriculture	and	Farmers	
79	
 
	
INDIAN	AGRICULTURE	AND	FARMERS	–	PROBLEMS	AND	REFORMS	
S.	K.	Goyal1,	Prabha2,	Jai	P.	Rai3	and	Shree	Ram	Singh4	
Introduction:	
In	olden	days,	agricultural	technique	was	eco-friendly	but	didn't	yield	high	crop	
comparing	now.	Anyway,	that	is	enough	for	those	people	as	there	was	less	population.	
Those	farmers	were	seen	as	GOD	but	now	it	is	in	contrast.	Only	governments	are	respecting	
farmers	and	that	too	only	for	those	belong	to	their	state	or	country.	Even,	farmer's	families	
do	not	give	respect	if	they	have	low	income	or	if	their	crop	failed.	Some	parents	resisting	
their	children	in	choosing	agriculture	as	their	career	field	due	to	their	disrespectful	
towards	farmers	but	they	do	not	understand	that	without	farmer,	it	is	impossible	to	survive	
in	this	world.	It	is	horrible	to	see	that	even	farmer	do	not	prefer	to	see	his	son	as	farmer	
due	to	influence	of	this	society.	
Now	 days,	 many	 farmers	 left	 their	 farming	 work	 and	 went	 to	 some	 nearby	
industries.	Also,	some	committed	suicide	and	the	reason	is	that	their	crops	are	failed	due	to	
unavailable	of	water	sources.	There	is	another	case	also	that	some	farmers	who	have	few	
acres	do	some	research	on	their	own	and	finding	new	techniques	so	that	they	can	achieve	
maximum	crop	yield.	These	farmers	arrange	private	water	sources	and	also	earn	more.	
These	farmers	are	selfless	as	they	also	publish	about	their	work	with	no	charge.	Anyway,	
some	are	eco-friendly	and	some	not.	
If	we	focus	deeply	in	it,	day	by	day	farmers	are	discouraging	by	this	helpless	society	
and	we	can	understand	that	farmer's	conditions	are	based	on	their	experience	and	also	on	
their	determination.	However,	it	shame	to	see	that	states	of	our	country	act	as	envy	
countries	for	lending	their	water	sources	for	agriculture.	In	India,	we	are	following	many	
modern	techniques	to	increase	crop's	yields.	Either	it	is	eco-friendly	or	not,	we	continue	
giving	importance	to	improve	the	crop	yield	as	to	withstand	the	increasing	population.	
Therefore,	we	lost	the	uniqueness	of	olden	day's	agriculture	as	these	modern	techniques	
reduce	the	strength	of	the	crops	and	also	reduce	land's	fertility.	
Anyway,	these	farming	techniques	are	necessary	as	day	by	day	farming	lands	are	
converting	into	apartments	and	factories.	Actually,	everything	is	happening	in	contrast	as	
for	increasing	population,	we	must	increase	the	agricultural	land	but	instead	we	are	
decreasing	it	and	that	result	in	using	modern	techniques	without	considering	whether	it	is	
eco-friendly	or	not.	And,	these	farming	techniques	give	more	profit	only	if	we	done	more	
investment.	Some	of	the	farming	techniques	found	by	farmers	on	their	own	researches	is	
spreading	in	newspaper	and	in	internet	for	encouraging	other	farmers	to	continue	it	and	
                                                             
1	Assistant	Professor/Scientist	(Farm	Engineering),		BHU-KVK,	I.Ag.Sc.,	Banaras	Hindu	University	
(RGSC),	Barkachha,	Mirzapur-231	001	(U.P.)	
2	Shri	venkateshwara	University	Gajraula,	Amroha-244	246	(U.P.)	
3 Assistant	Professor/Scientist	(Plant	Protection),		BHU-KVK,	I.Ag.Sc.,	Banaras	Hindu	University	
(RGSC),	Barkachha,	Mirzapur-231	001	(U.P.) 
4	Professor	and	Head,		BHU-KVK,	I.Ag.Sc.,	Banaras	Hindu	University	(RGSC),	Barkachha,	Mirzapur-231	
001	(U.P.) 
----------------Page (1) Break----------------
Goyal,	S.K.,	Rai,	Jai	P.		and	Kumar,	Sushil	(2016).	Indian	Agriculture	and	Farmers	
80	
 
earn	more	but	we	forget	that	many	villages	have	no	internet	facilities	and	many	farmers	
don't	know	to	read.	So,	the	awareness	is	lacking.	Our	government	should	appoint	some	
persons	to	spread	awareness	about	these	profitable	techniques	to	uneducated	farmers.	
	Some	are	non-eco-friendly	but	still	we	continue.	We	must	understand	that	anything	
which	is	non-eco-friendly	may	be	profitable	for	time	being	but	not	ever	lasting.	It	may	
result	in	danger	in	future.	Hence,	it	is	better	to	follow	profitable	eco-friendly	farming	
techniques	than	anything	else	for	better	future.	
Importance	of	agriculture	in	Indian	economy:	
India	is	mainly	an	agricultural	country.	Agriculture	is	the	most	important	occupation	
for	most	of	the	Indian	families.	In	India,	agriculture	contributes	about	sixteen	percent	
(16%)	of	total	GDP	and	ten	percent	(10%)	of	total	exports.	Over	60	%	of	India’s	land	area	
is	arable	making	it	the	second	largest	country	in	terms	of	total	arable	land.	Agricultural	
products	of	significant	economic	value	include	rice,	wheat,	potato,	tomato,	onion,	mangoes,	
sugar-cane,	beans,	cotton,	etc.	Agriculture	is	the	backbone	of	Indian	economy.	Though,	with	
the	growth	of	other	sectors,	the	overall	share	of	agriculture	on	GDP	of	the	country	has	
decreased.	Still,	Agriculture	continues	to	play	a	dominant	part	in	the	overall	economic	
scenario	of	India.	Food	is	essential	for	life.	We	depend	on	agricultural	outputs	for	our	food	
requirements.	India	produces	large	quantity	of	food	grains	such	as	millets,	cereals,	pulses,	
etc.	 A	 major	 portion	 of	 the	 food-stuffs	 produced	 is	 consumed	 within	 the	
country.	Our	farmers	works	day	and	night	to	feed	our	population	that	counts	over	1.21	
billion.	 Besides	 agriculture	 with	 a	commercial	 bias,	 subsistence	 agriculture	 with	 its	
emphasis	on	the	production	of	food	for	the	cultivator’s	family	is	widespread.	Traditionally,	
Agriculture	is	followed	as	the	simplest	method	of	obtaining	food	for	the	family.	Agriculture	
in	India	is	more	a	‘way	of	life’	then	a	‘mode	of	business.	
India	exports	excess	food	and	agricultural	products.	A	large	proportion	of	India’s	
export	trade	is	based	on	the	agricultural	products,	such	as	jute,	tea,	tobacco,	coffee,	spices,	
and	sugar.	It	helps	in	increasing	the	foreign	exchange.	India	is	ranked	seventh	in	terms	of	
agricultural	exports.	In	2013,	India	exported	agricultural	products	valuing	around	39	
billion	dollars.	Agriculture	is	the	basic	occupation	for	majority	of	main-workers	in	India.	A	
large	number	of	rural	women	are	also	engaged	in	agriculture.	According	to	2001	census,	
over	56.6%	of	the	main	workers	in	India	are	engaged	in	agricultural	and	allied	activities.	A	
number	of	industries	are	agro-based	industries,	such	as	jute,	cotton,	sugar,	tobacco,	
etc.	Raw	materials	for	such	industries	are	supplied	from	agricultural	produce.	Green	
revolution	began	in	India	with	an	objective	to	give	greater	emphasis	on	Agriculture.	The	
era	 of	 Green	 revolution	 that	 began	 in	 1960s	 witnessed	 significant	 increase	 in	 the	
production	of	food	crops.	The	introduction	of	improved	methods	of	agriculture	and	high	
yielding	varieties	(HYV)	seeds,	mainly	wheat,	had	resulted	into	remarkable	improvement	in	
agricultural	 outputs.	 The	 productivity	 of	 land	 increased	 tremendously	 giving	 huge	
economic	boost	to	the	nation.	
Characteristics	and	Problems	of	Indian	Agriculture:	
As	stated	at	the	outset,	Indian	economy	hinges	on	agriculture.	The	socioeconomic	
status	of	the	people,	the	national	polity	and	the	gamut	of	life	of	the	people	is	directly	
controlled	by	agriculture.	The	Indian	agriculture,	however,	has	its	own	characteristics.	
----------------Page (2) Break----------------
Goyal,	S.K.,	Rai,	Jai	P.		and	Kumar,	Sushil	(2016).	Indian	Agriculture	and	Farmers	
81	
 
Some	of	the	important	characteristics	and	problems	of	Indian	agriculture	have	been	
described	briefly	in	the	following	section:	
1.	Subsistent	in	Character:	Despite	eleven	five	year	plans,	in	greater	parts	of	the	
country,	Indian	agriculture	is	subsistent	in	character.	The	cultivators	and	farmers	grow	
crops	mainly	for	the	family	consumption.	It	is	only	in	the	controlled	irrigated	parts	of	the	
country	like	Punjab,	Haryana,	western	Uttar	Pradesh,	and	Kaveri	delta	where	agriculture	
has	become	an	agri-business	or	is	market	oriented.	
2.	Heavy	Pressure	of	Population:	The	Indian	agriculture	is	characterised	by	heavy	
pressure	of	population.	About	70	per	cent	of	the	total	population	of	the	country	is	directly	
or	indirectly	dependent	on	agriculture.	At	present,	the	per	capita	agricultural	land	is	only	
about	0.10	hectare	as	against	0.30	hectare	in	1951.	The	world	average	of	per	head	
availability	of	agricultural	land	is	about	4.5	hectares.	The	fast	growth	of	population	
industrialization	and	urbanization	are	putting	enormous	pressure	on	arable	land.	
3.	Predominance	of	Food	Grains:		In	 both	 the	 Kharif	 (summer)	 and	 the	 rabi	
(winter)	seasons,	grain	crops	occupy	the	greater	propor-tion	of	the	cropped	area.	In	fact,	
rice,	maize,	millets,	bajra,	ragi,	and	pulses	are	the	dominant	crops	in	the	kharif	season,	and	
wheat,	gram	and	barley	occupy	over	three-fourth	of	the	total	cropped	area	in	the	rabi	
season.	
4.	Mixed	Cropping:	In	the	rain-fed	areas	of	the	country,	mixed	cropping	is	a	
common	practice.	The	farmers	mix	millets,	maize	and	pulses	in	the	kharifseason	and	wheat,	
gram	and	barley	in	the	rabi	season.	In	the	areas	of	Jhuming	(shifting	cultivation),	ten	to	
sixteen	crops	are	mixed	and	sown	in	the	same	field.	The	rationale	behind	mixing	of	crops	is	
to	get	good	agricultural	return.	In	case	the	monsoon	is	good,	the	rice	crop	will	give	better	
production	and	in	case	of	failure	of	monsoon,	the	less	water	requiring	crops	like	maize,	
millets,	bajra	and	pulses	will	give	good	harvest.	Mixed	cropping	is	a	characteristic	of	
subsistent	agriculture.	
5.	High	Percentage	of	the	Reporting	Area	under	Cultivation:		In	 India,	 about	 55	
per	cent	of	the	total	reporting	area	is	under	cultivation	of	crops	and	pastures.	This	is	much	
higher	when	compared	with	about	4	per	cent	in	Canada,	12	per	cent	in	China,	15	per	cent	in	
Japan,	and	16	per	cent	in	USA.	
6.	Limited	Intensive	Agriculture:		In	 India,	 only	 about	 one-third	 of	 the	 total	
cropped	area	is	under	double	and	multiple	cropping.	Increase	in	the	double	cropped	area	is	
difficult	unless	heavy	investment	is	made	in	development	of	canal	and	tube-well	irrigation.	
7.	Primitive	Technology:	Most	of	the	farmers	of	the	country,	especially	in	the	rain-
fed	areas,	use	draught	animals	(bullocks,	male	buffaloes	and	camels)	for	ploughing	and	
other	agricultural	operations.	The	health	and	efficiency	of	draught	animals	is	low	which	
often	retards	the	timely	operations	of	sowing,	weeding,	and	harvesting.	
8.	Indian	Agriculture	is	Labour	Intensive:	In	India,	agriculture	is	a	labour	based	
enterprise	in	which	most	of	the	agricultural	operations,	like	ploughing,	levelling,	sowing,	
weeding,	spraying,	sprinkling,	harvesting,	and	threshing	are	carried	on	mainly	by	human	
hands.	The	use	of	machinery	is	still	confined	only	to	the	rich	fainters	of	Punjab,	Haryana,	
western	 Uttar	 Pradesh,	 plains	 of	 Uttarakhand,	 Bihar,	 Madhya	 Pradesh,	 Gujarat,	 and	
Maharashtra.	
9.	Rain-fed	Agriculture:	In	the	greater	parts	(over	56%)	of	the	country,	agriculture	
is	largely	dependent	on	rainfall,	especially	the	 summer	monsoon.	Unfortunately,	the	
behaviour	of	summer	monsoon	is	highly	erratic.	Consequently,	the	variability	of	rainfall	is	
----------------Page (3) Break----------------
Goyal,	S.K.,	Rai,	Jai	P.		and	Kumar,	Sushil	(2016).	Indian	Agriculture	and	Farmers	
82	
 
high	which	affects	the	agricultural	return	ad-versely.	Only	about	55	per	cent	of	the	total	
cropped	area	is	under	irrigation	in	which	the	farmers	are	more	confident	about	their	
agricultural	returns	even	at	the	failure	of	monsoon,	as	it	happened	in	2009.	
10.	Less	Area	under	Leguminous	and	Fodder	Crops:	The	nitrogen	fixing	crops	like	
pulses	are	getting	less	area	under	their	cultivation.	Consequently,	the	natural	fertility	of	the	
soil	is	depleting	and	the	soils	are	losing	their	resilience	characteristics.	Moreover,	less	than	
4	per	cent	of	the	cropped	area	is	under	fodder	crops.	This,	together	with	lack	of	good	
pastures,	 has	 detrimental	 effect	 over	 the	 development	 of	 dairy	 farming	 and	 milk-
production.	India	has	the	largest	number	of	cattle	in	the	world,	but	it	occupies	an	
insignificant	place	in	respect	of	cattle	products	in	the	world.	
11.	Tradition	Bound:	By	and	large,	the	Indian	agriculture	is	tradition	bound.	
Established	several	centuries	ago,	the	structures	of	a	self-contained	rural	economy	were	
founded	in	caste-derived	 occupational	land	tenures,	made	complex	 by	absentee	and	
parasitic	landlords.	These	institutional	factors	and	tradition	bound	institutions	are	a	major	
obstacles	in	the	path	of	innovations	and	modernisation	of	agriculture.	
12.	Low	Productivity:	One	of	the	main	problems	of	Indian	agriculture	is	its	low	
productivity.	In	comparison	to	the	other	agricultural	countries,	the	Indian	agricultural	
yields	are	among	the	lowest	in	the	world	(Table	9.4	and	Table	9.5).	The	main	cause	of	low	
yield	per	hectare	is	the	low	fertility	of	soil	and	less	care	to	replenish	it	through	green-
manure,	fertilisers,	fallowing,	and	scientific	rotation	of	crops.	The	consumption	pattern	of	
chemical	fertilizers	has	been	shown	in	Fig.	9.4.	It	may	be	seen	from	this	figure	that	Punjab	
with	175	Kg/ha	is	the	leading	consumer	of	chemical	fertilisers	followed	by	Haryana	160	
Kg/ha.	Uttar	Pradesh,	 Andhra	Pradesh,	Tamil-Nadu	and	West-Bengal.	In	general	 the	
fertiliser	consumption	level	is	very	low	in	the	areas	of	dry	farming.	
13.			Government	Policy:	After	the	First	Five	Year	Plan,	Indian	agriculture	got	a	
step-motherly	treatment.	The	farming	community	has	been	ignored,	while	there	has	been	
more	emphasis	on	industrialisation	and	urbanisation.	The	growth	rate	of	agriculture	is	only	
about	2.5	per	cent,	while	the	overall	growth	rate	of	the	country	is	about	9	per	cent	(2010).	
The	farmers	are	not	getting	remunerative	prices,	most	of	them	are	under	debts	and	in	
several	parts	of	the	country,	farmers	are	committing	suicides.	This	dismal	picture	is	the	
result	of	continuous	careless	agricultural	land	use	planning.	Muclemphasis	has	however,	
been	laid	on	the	rural	and	agricultural	development	in	the	Elevend	Five	Year	Plan	to	
remove	the	rural,	urban	inequality.	Creation	of	580	lakh	jobs	has	also	been	proposed	in	this	
plan	to	overcome	the	problem	of	unemployment	and	to	check	the	ruraf-urban	migration.	
The	real	challenge	for	the	government	is	in	trying	to	boost	food	output	at,	home,	and	
increase	investment	in	rural	and	agricultural	infrastructure	for	the	same,	while	at	the	same	
time	not	letting	its	guard	down	on	fiscal	prudence	or	inflation	management.	The	severe	
drought	of	2009	over	greater	part	of	the	country	has	increased	the	miseries	of	the	farmers,	
which	is	a	set-back	in	the	revival	of	Indian	economy.	
14.			Lack	of	Definite	Agricultural	Land	Use	Policy:	In	the	absence	of	a	definite	land	
use	policy,	the	farmers	grow	crops	according	to	their	convenience.	This	sometimes	leads	to	
excess	of	production	and	sometimes	scarcity.	Many	a	times	the	farmers	have	to	burn	their	
sugarcane	crop	and	often	get	less	remunerative	price	of	vegetables	(onion,	and	other	
vegetables).	
15.			Low	Status	of	Agriculture	in	the	Society:	In	greater	parts	of	India,	agriculture	
is	not	considered	as	a	dignified	and	honourable	profession.This	leads	to	disappointment	
----------------Page (4) Break----------------
Goyal,	S.K.,	Rai,	Jai	P.		and	Kumar,	Sushil	(2016).	Indian	Agriculture	and	Farmers	
83	
 
and	lack	of	enthusiasm	among	most	of	the	farmers.	The	younger	generation	of	farmers	
prefer	 a	petty	 government	 job	 to	 agriculture.	 Moreover,	 rich	 farmers	 invest	 their	
agricultural	profits	in	non-agricultural	sectors	which	are	more	remunerative.	In	fact,	there	
is	a	mass	exodus	of	people	from	rural	to	urban	areas	in	search	of	lucrative	jobs.	There	is	a	
constant	flow	of	human	and	material	resources	from	villages	to	the	cities.	This	has	led	to	
fast	growth	of	urban	centres	which	are	infested	with	slums,	ghettoes,	and	shanty	colonies.	
16.	Land	Tenancy:	In	many	parts	of	the	country,	there	are	absentee	landlords	and	
the	tillers	are	not	having	the	rights	on	agricultural	land.	The	big	landlords	who	own	big	
farm	houses	are	rich	urbanites.	The	tillers	and	share	croppers	who	actually	cultivate	the	
land	 of	 absentee	 land	 lords	 are	 not	 much	 interested_	 inthe	 development,	 proper	
management,	utilisation	of	agricultural	land,	and	modernisation	of	agriculture.	This	system	
leads	to	lack	of	interest	on	the	part	of	the	tiller	and	consequently,	the	per	unit	yield	of	most	
of	the	crops	is	low.	
17.	Poverty	and	Indebtedness	of	the	Farmers:	Although	cultivators	indebtedness	
is	universal	in	subsistent	farming,	its	impact	is	perhaps	nowhere	as	crushing	as	in	India.	
Unfortunately,	over	85	per	cent	of	all	the	cultivating	families	are	under	debt.	It	is	because	of	
heavy	indebtedness	that	several	thousand	farmers	in	Andhra	Pradesh,	Karnataka,	Tamil	
Nadu,	Maharashtra,	Orissa,	Gujarat,	Punjab,	and	Uttar	Pradesh	have	committed	suicide	
during	the	last	ten	years.	The	small	and	marginal	farmers	are	still	dependent	on	money-
lenders	who	charge	exorbitant	interest	on	loans	(25	to	40	per	cent	per	annum).	In	the	case	
of	non-payment,	the	money-lenders	grab	their	mortgage	property	making	them	pauper.	
Some	special	provisions	have	been	made	in	the	draft	of	the	Eleventh	Five	Year	Plan	to	
overcome	the	problem	of	farmers	indebtedness.	A	scheme	of	debt	waiving	for	small	and	
marginal	farmers	and	debt	relief	for	other	farmers	was	announced	by	the	government	in	
the	Union	Budget	of	2008-09.	
18.	Inadequacy	of	Extension	Service:	For	the	diffusion	of	agricultural	innovations	
both	in	the	irrigated	and	rain-fed	areas,	a	team	of	skilled	village	level	workers	is	required.	
There	is	much	to	be	done	in	this	area.	Training	of	workers	and	their	dedication	can	help	the	
tradition	bound	farmers	to	modernise	their	agriculture.	
19.	Inadequate	Agricultural	Research	and	Education,	Training,	and	Extension:	
Though	enough	progress	has	been	made	in	the	field	of	agricultural	research,	there	is	no	co-
ordination	between	the	farm	and	research	laboratories	in	the	different	agro-climatic	
regions	of	the	country.	Hence,	gains	of	new	agricultural	researches	are	not	reaching	the	
common	cultivators,	especially	the	marginal	and	small	farmers.	Very	little	attention	is	
being	paid	 for	educating	and	training	farmers	for	the	 adoption	of	new	 agricultural	
innovations	and	techniques	to	increase	their	agricultural	production.	
20.	Other	Characteristics	and	Problems:	There	are	numerous	other	problems	also	
which	are	affecting	the	agricultural	production	and	rural	economy	and	society	adversely.	
For	example,	unscientific	methods	of	agriculture,	inadequate	irrigation	facilities,	less	use	of	
chemical	 fertilisers,	 insecticides,	 pesticides,	 less	 remunerative	 prices	 of	 agricultural	
products,	poverty,	hunger,	and	malnutrition	of	farmers	and	lack	of	infrastructural	facilities	
like	roads,	water,	irrigation,	electricity,	credit,	banking,	and	crop-insurance.	
	
	
----------------Page (5) Break----------------
Goyal,	S.K.,	Rai,	Jai	P.		and	Kumar,	Sushil	(2016).	Indian	Agriculture	and	Farmers	
84	
 
Farming	Corporatization	would	be	a	Solution:	
An	idea	of	corporate	farming	is	that	let	a	corporate	own	a	farming	of	a	village.	Let	
him	take	the	land	of	farmers	on	a	lease	for	5	years	or	10	years	depending	upon	his	
investment.	The	corporate	can	give	the	lease	amount	either	quarterly	or	monthly	to	the	
land	owners.	Then	he	can	employ	the	farmers	(land	owners	or	not)	for	his	intended	crop	
depending	 upon	 his	 planning.	 The	 corporate	 would	 provide	 all	 the	 technologies,	
infrastructures	(like	cold	storages,	food	processing	units	etc).	Finally	the	corporate	would	
take	back	all	the	crops.	If	there	is	more	profit,	he	can	distribute	bonus	among	land	owners	
and	farm	labourers.	
This	would	end	the	problem	of	investment,	technology	and	other	problems	which	
government	can't	afford.	Even	FDI	can	be	brought	in	this	sector.	This	will	enhance	
agriculture	productivity,	end	stress	among	farmers	(land	owner	or	not)	and	address	the	
farm	suicide	very	effectively.	There	are	some	problems	also.	The	above	idea	can	work	in	
the	areas	having	some	infrastructures	like	connectivity,	irrigation	and	other	suitability.	
India's	large	farm	land	lacks	connectivity,	forget	about	irrigation.	
Law	and	order	 is	also	 a	concern	in	many	 areas	 where	corporate	wouldn't	risk	its	
investment.	Sometimes	Corporate	sector	might	want	a	guarantee	for	collecting	his	harvest.	
There	would	be	some	problem	in	labour	law	related	issues.	
On	the	other	hand	as	we	witness	the	way	Sugar	factory	cartel	harass	the	sugarcane	
farmers	(not	paying	the	cost	of	sugarcane	and	sometimes	paying	less	rate)	as	in	UP	and	
Maharashtra;	same	thing	can	develop	by	cartel	of	corporates	too.	
Precision	Agriculture	would	also	be	the	Solution	to	the	Problems:	
	A	small	sugarcane	farmer	in	western	Uttar	Pradesh,	Shri	Raghuvir	Singh	and	his	
family,	own	about	four	hectares	of	land.	He	has	two	sons	who	are	both	graduates	and	work	
in	Gurgaon.	When	I	asked	him	why	he	did	not	make	his	sons	farmers,	he	says	that	farming	
is	hard	work,	is	non-remunerative	and	it	is	difficult	to	get	labour.	Besides	he	also	thinks	
that	farming	is	not	glamorous,	a	farmer's	son	is	a	non-marriageable	commodity	and	that	his	
sons	have	a	better	life	in	Gurgaon.	Shri	Singh	is	getting	on	with	age	and	is	thinking	of	selling	
his	land	to	the	highest	bidder	and	moving	out	of	farming	and	even	going	and	staying	with	
his	sons	in	Gurgaon.	Village	after	village	and	state	after	state,	this	is	the	story	of	most	
farmers	in	India.	They	want	to	sell	their	land	and	move	out	of	farming.	Indian	agriculture	is	
in	crisis.	No	matter	how	advanced	or	rich	we	become,	all	of	us	have	to	eat	food.	We	cannot	
eat	money,	mobiles,	software	or	nuts	and	bolts.	
We	feel	wealth	and	security	of	the	country	comes	from	its	land	and	hence	what	is	
needed	 is	 sustainable,	 high-tech	 and	 high	 productivity	 agriculture	 which	 will	 be	
remunerative	and	help	provide	both	food	and	energy	security.	Precision	agriculture,	which	
can	provide	precise	inputs	like	water,	fertilizer,	insecticides	at	the	right	time	to	crops,	can	
help	bring	in	the	next	green	revolution.	
In	the	existing	agricultural	scenario,	India	is	characterized	by	small	farms	with	
around	80	percent	of	total	holdings	less	than	2	hectares	(5	acres)	and	land	mostly	rainfed	
with	only	30	percent	irrigated.	Around	55	percent	of	the	Indian	population	depends	on	
farming,	as	against	less	than	4	percent	in	US	and	other	advanced	economies,	because	of	
heavy	mechanisation	of	agriculture.	Because	of	poor	availability	of	funds,	farm	inputs,	poor	
support	price	structure	for	the	produce	and	almost	no	farm	insurance,	farming	in	India	is	
----------------Page (6) Break----------------
Goyal,	S.K.,	Rai,	Jai	P.		and	Kumar,	Sushil	(2016).	Indian	Agriculture	and	Farmers	
85	
 
non-remunerative	and	50	percent	of	farmers	are	in	debt	-	the	main	reason	for	a	large	
number	of	suicides.	
	Precision	agriculture	(PA)	may	provide	a	way	to	do	it:	
Precision	agriculture	is	originated	in	US	and	European	countries	where	farms	are	
generally	big	(over	100	hectares),	it	sees	extensive	use	of	Global	Positioning	Satellite	(GPS)	
for	precise	mapping	of	farms	and	-	with	appropriate	software	-	informs	the	farmer	about	
status	of	his	crop	and	which	part	of	the	farm	requires	inputs	like	water,		fertilizer	and	
pesticide	etc.	In	western	countries	it	is	also	characterized	by	increased	mechanisation	with	
the	use	of	heavy	farm	machinery	(average	power	100-200	kW)	for	all	the	farm	and	field	
operations	such	as	sowing,	harvesting,	weeding,	baling	etc.	The	machinery	runs	on	fossil	
fuels	and	uses	about	63	percent	of	the	total	energy	used	in	farming	-	a	significant	amount.	
Precision	agriculture	for	small	farms,	on	the	other	hand,	can	use	small	farm	machinery	and	
robots	which	may	also	be	amenable	to	run	on	renewable	fuels	like	bio	oil,	compressed	
biogas	and	electricity	produced	on	farms	by	agricultural	residues.	The	energy	efficiency	of	
the	 machinery	 and	operations	 could	 also	 be	 improved.	 For	 small	 farms,	 precision	
agriculture	 may	 include	 sub-surface	 drip	 irrigation	 for	 precise	 water	 and	 fertilizer	
application	to	the	crops	and	robots	for	no-till	sowing,	weed	removal,	harvesting	and	other	
farming	operations.	Some	of	these	robots	are	already	being	used	on	small	farms	in	US	and	
Europe	and	with	vigorous	R&D	taking	place,	it	is	expected	that	they	may	be	deployed	in	
large	scale	in	near	future.	Similarly	drones	are	being	used	quite	regularly	in	Japan	and	US	
for	insecticide	application	to	the	crops.	Use	of	drones	for	agriculture	is	proverbial	"turning	
swords	into	ploughs!"	Most	of	these	robotic	machines	and	drones	are	small	in	size	and	
hence	are	very	suitable	and	excellent	match	for	small	farm	applications.	Thus	small	farms	
size	of	India	is	a	blessing	in	disguise	and	ripe	for	large	scale	application	of	precision	
agriculture.	Precision	 agriculture	 in	 US	 and	 other	 countries	 has	 shown	 tremendous	
increase	in	productivity,	lowering	of	inputs	and	hence	increased	remuneration	to	the	
farmers.	Besides	it	has	helped	improve	the	quality	of	land	with	no-till	farming	and	less	
water	usage.	Similar	things	are	possible	in	India	with	its	use.	However,	the	biggest	criticism	
of	mechanized	agriculture	is	that	farm	machinery	is	very	costly	and	no	farmer,	including	
big	ones,	can	afford	it.	Since	precision	agriculture	is	going	to	be	very	dependent	on	
mechanization,	this	criticism	is	presently	justified.	However,	we	feel	the	mechanization	and	
PA	may	give	rise	in	a	big	way	to	farm	machinery	leasing	agencies	in	rural	areas.	These	
companies	will	lease	the	mechanized	equipment,	including	drip	irrigation	systems,	to	the	
farmers	and	also	provide	trained	manpower	to	run	these	machines.		
Such	a	thing	already	exists	on	limited	scale	in	India	where	few	agencies	do	the	
wheat	harvesting	using	combines	and	spraying	of	crops.	They	charge	the	farmers	on	per	
hour	basis	and	with	the	unavailability	of	farm	labour,	farmers	find	this	concept	economical	
and	 attractive.	 In	 western	 Maharashtra,	 more	 and	 more	 farmers	are	 depending	 on	
mechanisation	offered	by	such	agencies.	With	increasing	demand	these	leasing	enterprises	
will	increase	and	as	PA	develops	and	increases,	they	will	get	more	structured,	so	that	just	
like	private	taxi	companies,	they	will	be	available	on	demand.	It	is	also	envisaged	that	these	
leasing	companies	may	form	the	backbone	of	Indian	agriculture	by	providing	the	necessary	
advice	and	manpower	to	the	farmers	on	precision	agriculture.	
Critics	of	mechanisation	also	contend	that	by	timely	sowing	of	crops	and	applying	
proper	and	recommended	water	and	fertilizer	to	it,	a	farmer	can	easily	improve	the	
----------------Page (7) Break----------------
Goyal,	S.K.,	Rai,	Jai	P.		and	Kumar,	Sushil	(2016).	Indian	Agriculture	and	Farmers	
86	
 
productivity	of	crops	and	his	income.	However	application	of	inputs	at	proper	time	
requires	timely	availability	of	labour,	water	and	fertilizer	-	all	of	which	are	becoming	
scarcer	and	scarcer.		Besides	majority	of	farms	are	rainfed	and	with	the	change	of	weather	
patterns,	availability	of	rainwater	is	very	unpredictable.	Hence	the	non-availability	of	
inputs	and	labour	on	time	is	the	biggest	stumbling	block	to	increase	productivity	of	farms	
and	remuneration.	PA	can	help	in	this	matter.	To	our	mind	the	ultimate	role	of	a	farmer	
should	be	to	identify	better	crops,	use	that	seed	to	propagate	it	further	and	hence	in	effect	
become	a	breeder	of	sorts.	Progressive	farmers	already	do	that	and	with	more	time	
available	to	them	because	of	PA	they	may	be	able	to	help	Indian	agriculture	to	produce	
better	 and	 higher	 yielding	 varieties.	Also	 the	 mechanization	 will	 make	 the	 farming	
glamorous	and	may	attract	more	people	to	take	up	farming	in	a	big	way.	The	most	
important	component	in	taking	PA	forward	will	be	in	creating	a	huge	resource	of	engineers,	
scientists	and	agriculturists	to	develop	various	components	of	the	technology.	Without	
excellent	manpower	and	consequently	good	R&D,	Precision	agriculture	will	not	succeed.	
One	of	the	misfortunes	of	Indian	education	system	is	that	all	the	good	students	want	to	get	
into	engineering	and	medical	streams	and	only	the	leftover	students	go	into	agriculture.	
There	is	a	need	for	excellent	engineers	from	institutions	like	IITs,	NITs,	etc.	to	design	
machinery	like	robots	and	drones	for	PA.	This	can	be	facilitated	by	establishing	a	new	
branch	of	engineering	called	agricultural	mechanotrics	or	robotics	where	faculty	and	
students	from	almost	all	branches	of	engineering	will	interact	and	collaborate	to	develop	
smart	systems	for	Precision	agriculture.	Another	way	forward	is	when	scientists	from	ICAR	
institutes,	 engineers	 from	 academic	 world,	 industry	 and	 farmers	 work	 together	 in	
developing	Precision	agriculture.	
We	also	feel	that	Precision	agriculture	may	provide	 a	platform	for	industrial	
corporate	social	responsibility	(CSR)	activity.	After	all	helping	the	rural	poor	improve	their	
livelihood	 through	 high	 tech	 farming	 should	 qualify	 as	 a	 CSR	 activity.	 The	 Indian	
government	can	facilitate	in	this	process	by	giving	soft	loans	and	sops	to	the	industry	so	
that	they	get	more	engaged	in	agriculture	and	PA	activities.	High	tech	Precision	agriculture	
therefore	can	help	in	bringing	next	green	revolution	to	India	and	can	produce	tremendous	
rural	wealth	in	a	sustainable	and	environmentally	sound	way.	Farmers	and	farms	are	the	
backbone	of	any	country	since	they	can	produce	food,	fuel	(agricultural	residues)	and	
wealth	from	the	land.	They	should	be	helped	by	all	members	of	society	and	developing	
Precision	agriculture	is	a	step	in	the	right	direction.		
Conclusions:	
The	critical	issues	that	plague	Indian	agriculture	at	present	are	the	knowledge	
deficit	and	infrastructure	deficit,	especially	in	the	rural	areas.	Problems	related	to	irrigation	
infrastructure,	market	infrastructure	and	transport	infrastructure	add	significant	cost	to	
farmers'	operations.	Another	issue	is	lack	of	delivery	mechanisms.	There	are	a	number	of	
schemes	aimed	to	bring	development	in	agriculture.	We	do	not	have	effective	delivery	
mechanisms	that	can	translate	into	effective	facilitation	in	terms	of	increasing	productivity	
or	decreasing	cost	or	increasing	price	realization	at	the	ground	level.	Moreover,	inadequate	
government	support	exacerbates	these	issues.	Thus,	corporate	farming	could	be	a	solution	
to	Indian	agrarian	sector,	but	it	needs	a	deep	thinking	and	innovating	better	policies	so	that	
neither	the	corporates	nor	the	farmers	be	at	loss.	Also	the	role	of	central	government	and	
state	governments	needs	to	be	defined	clearly	as	because	of	being	a	joint	subject,	it	creates	
----------------Page (8) Break----------------
Goyal,	S.K.,	Rai,	Jai	P.		and	Kumar,	Sushil	(2016).	Indian	Agriculture	and	Farmers	
87	
 
lot	of	confusion.	Eminent	experts	should	do	research	in	this	aspect	and	governments	must	
take	a	proactive	action.	Indian	agrarian	sector	in	fact	requires	very	innovative	ideas	for	
uplifting	of	this	sector.	Also,	without	mechanization,	farming	is	hard	and	back-breaking	
work.	This	has	resulted	in	most	farmers'	children	quitting	farming	and	going	for	other	
vocations.	Farmers	get	more	money	in	selling	their	land	to	builders,	malls	and	factories.	
This	has	put	more	pressure	on	farmland,	thereby	requiring	technologies	to	increase	the	
productivity	so	that	shrinking	farmland	can	feed	billion	plus	people	of	India	in	the	future.	
India,	though	one	of	the	biggest	producers	of	agricultural	products,	has	very	low	farm	
productivity,	with	the	average	only	33	percent	of	the	best	farms	world	over.	This	needs	to	
be	increased	so	that	farmers	can	get	more	remuneration	from	the	same	piece	of	land	with	
less	labour.	
	
	
View publication stats
----------------Page (9) Break----------------
